The Project Gutenberg EBook of Industries and Inventions of the Shakers;
Shaker Music, by Bertha Lindsay and Lillian Phelps

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Industries and Inventions of the Shakers; Shaker Music

Author: Bertha Lindsay
        Lillian Phelps

Release Date: November 19, 2019 [EBook #60732]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INDUSTRIES, INVENTIONS OF THE SHAKERS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       Industries and Inventions
                             of The Shakers




                              SHAKER MUSIC
                           _A Brief History_


                                 + + +

                         Sister Bertha Lindsay
                         Sister Lillian Phelps

                           Canterbury Shakers

                                 + + +

                       Canterbury, New Hampshire


The subject for the evening is one of great interest, as dating back 186
years, we find the Shakers to be an exceedingly ingenious people,
devoted pioneers of this adventure.

It is rather difficult for one who has been a member of this church, to
speak of the achievements of this especial group without seeming
boastful, yet, we, the inheritors can justly be proud of the useful
contributions made in early days. It therefore is our duty to inform
those interested while we are able.

While different societies originated and manufactured some particular
item, these were shared with all others as, while we were like one big
family, each society was a complete unit within themselves,
self-sustaining, supplying the necessities for their own needs. An
interchange of goods from one village to another was possible because of
frequent visits of the leaders. I will now try to detail for you some of
the early industries and inventions.

Perhaps the most colorful of the early industries was the herb and root
industry. This was a natural outgrowth of the Shakers’ interest in
gardening and agriculture. Eldress Anna White states in her writings
that, “the Shakers were the first in this country to introduce botanical
medical practice, the first roots, herbs and vegetable extracts for
medicinal purposes placed on the market having borne the Shaker stamp”.

Thomas Corbett of Canterbury originated the famous Syrup of Sarsaparilla
also, the Wild Cherry Pectoral Syrup. Rose-water was far-famed, used in
cooking as well as medicinally. I would not have time to give a complete
list of the many herbs and roots, grown, harvested and packaged, but
will quote a few figures to show the tremendous extent of this industry.
Records show this industry started in 1800, reaching its greatest
importance around 1848 when the sisters cleaned and packaged 9,327 lbs.
of roots. In 1871, 14,079 bottles of Norwood’s Tincture of Veratum alone
was put up. Perhaps the extent of this business may be gauged by the
fact that in one year more than a million labels were cut. How many of
you ever heard of “Healolene”? A hand, or after-shave lotion made from
quinces, at Mt. Lebanon.

The physics gardens at Mt. Lebanon occupied at one time over 50 acres,
where a variety of 50 plants were raised. They collected nearly 200
varieties of indigenous plants, bringing from the South, West and from
Europe some 30 to 40 other varieties.

Between 1861-62 the extract business flourished, with over 100
varieties, both solid and fluid manufactured. The herb industry
continued on a much smaller scale as late as 1900. Witch-Hazel was
distilled and sold at Canterbury up to 1910. The herb industry rapidly
extended to Watervliet, Harvard, Sabbathday Lake, Canterbury, Enfield
and Union Village.

It is but a step from the herb industry to the garden seed industry
which flourished from the establishment of this business in 1794 to the
early 1890’s. In its early stages plain paper and cloth bags were used,
later brightly colored posters were distributed, and the seeds put up in
neatly labeled boxes or in gayly tinted little packages. One of the
first industries was the making of men’s wool hats. Another prosperous
industry was the tanning of leather. It grew to such dimensions, the
Shakers were not able to raise enough hides themselves, so bought from
nearby farmers. The manufacture of cloth and leather shoes were for
their own use mainly. Leather mittens, bridles, saddles and harnesses
were also made. Such industries as making whips and whip-lashes, dry
measures, brass, bone, ivory and pewter buttons, shoe-buckles, garden
hoes, and ironware were necessary items for home use.

Shingle, brick making and stone-cutting were active industries, filling
orders for the world’s market long before they used these items
themselves.

Countless items as apple barrels, wash and dye tubs, churns and seed
pails were manufactured. Wooden dippers in nests of 3. Sieves of many
types were made of wire, horses’ manes and cows’ tails, woven on special
looms.

Having a natural deposit of red clay at Mt. Lebanon, pipes were made for
sale. A small industry was the manufacture of steel, brass and silver
pens, with handles of wood and tin, made to close telescopically. The
Shakers were credited with being the originators of the metal pen. An
important industry was the making of oak staves for molasses hogsheads
which were exported to the West Indies. Bee-keeping was an essential
experiment as the immense orchards of fruit trees were thusly benefited.
Markets as far as England were found for their superior apples. Sundry
items like coonskin fur gloves, floor mops, horn combs and the making of
men’s shirts were occupations in most of the societies.

While much of the sisters’ time was occupied with domestic tasks, they
found time to assist in picking over the herbs, making seed bags and
other useful articles. Wines, sauces and jellies were made for sale,
cucumber pickles and tomato catsup were flourishing around 1811. Dairy
products such as fine cheeses and butter were sold in quantity. Other
related industries were the making of sausages, the raising of
strawberries, currants and gooseberries, even to barrels of dried
elderberries. Our gift shops sold quantities of sugared flagroot, also
sugared lemon, orange and grapefruit peel. Tons of dried apples were
sold or made into apple sauce. Kilns were constructed for the paying
industry of drying both corn and apples. The famous Shaker Applesauce
was cooked in sweet cider, the proportion being something like 4 gallons
boiled down to one, then slowly cooking the dried apples in this. The
result, a rich, delicious sauce.

The famous Shaker cloak, named the Dorothy Shaker Cape, was made from
the finest imported French broadcloth. The originator of this Cape was
Eldress Dorothy Durgin of Canterbury. These may still be purchased from
tiny white ones for babies through little girls’ sizes to ladies’ sizes,
although the fine material of earlier days cannot be found, they still
are a charming acquisition to milady’s ward-robe.

Here in Canterbury we had an orchard of over 1,000 maples, situated
about a mile northeast of the village. Maple products such as syrup,
maple sugar cakes, pulled candy and clay sugar formed a thriving
industry for many years.

A variety of many types of baskets were made. Elder Daniel Boler and
Daniel Crossman of Mt. Lebanon invented machinery for splint making and
basket working. This craft was learned in early years from traveling
groups of Indians. Between 1809 to 1871 an unending variety of several
patterns were made. Immense baskets for herbs, knitting, egg and fruit
baskets or utility baskets, difficult to classify were woven. The
popular baskets or boxes were among the most unique made in several of
the societies from the middle 1800’s to the present. The poplar tree is
native to our woods, they were cut when frozen into 24 in. lengths, put
through a Shaker invented plane, taking off thin strips of poplar, then
shredded into fine strips, first by hand, later Brother Irving Greenwood
devised an electric powered machine to shred the poplar. It was woven on
hand looms. A paper pasted on the reverse side made it firmer and less
susceptible to breakage. Lined with various colored satins, they
presented neat utility or sewing boxes.

No product of the Shaker wood-working shops possesses greater charm than
the multi-sized oval boxes, made in nests of from 5 to 12. The boxes
were joined with a method called fingers, a novel refinement over the
old style of joining. Brother Delmar Wilson still active at our Maine
society made oval carriers by the thousand. These lined with satin
fitted with emery, cushion and wax made attractive sewing boxes.

Women who joined the societies were often experienced in the varied
domestic arts practiced in colonial homes, so it was natural they
continue to spin yarn, weave and dye cloth, dip candles and engage in
the countless occupations of that period. Looms were used and
constructed at the very outset. Carding, spinning and the weaving of
woolen, cotton and cotton-wool cloth done exclusively by the sisters,
who also hatcheled the flax for linen cloth. The first bird’s-eye linen
was a Shaker product. Until 1809 when a machine was invented, the cloth
was cut with shears made by Shaker blacksmiths. The looms were in
constant use until 1853 when the comparative cheapness of mill cloth
made it seem uneconomical for the Shakers to rely on their own produce.
However, weaving of handkerchiefs, toweling, carpets and spreads
continued up to 1865. In Kentucky the Shakers grew mulberry trees so as
to raise silk worms for the weaving of silk. Some of the first
iridescent silk was woven in Kentucky, also the Sabbathday Lake Shakers
made some of the first wrinkle-proof material. This was obtained by
placing the cloth between layers of chemically treated paper, pressed in
a Shaker invented screw-press, using heat underneath, producing a shiny
surface on one side, a dull water silk on the reverse.

The Shaker brothers were expert agriculturists and mechanics, making
woodenware such as pails, tubs, measures, boxes, spinning wheels, rakes
and all the furniture to supply the houses with the necessities of
living. Chairs were made in all societies for their own use; however, at
Mt. Lebanon chairs of all sizes were made for sale, up to the close of
that society. A particularly interesting chair, called a tilting chair,
was made by the addition of a novel invention called a boot, which
fitted on the bottom of the back legs like a ball and socket joint. The
chair revolves on the boot while the boot remains stationary—secured
with a piece of rawhide, it enabled one to tilt back without tipping
over or leaving mars on the floors.

Saxon and Merino sheep were raised to obtain the finest wool for
weaving. Thoroughbred horses and cattle were raised for sale. Some of
the first thoroughbred Guernseys were purchased by the Canterbury
Shakers from the English Isle of Guernsey. The brothers looked upon the
soil as something to be redeemed from rugged barrenness into smiling
fertility and beauty. So their vast acreage yielded abundantly as proof
of their devotion. From early records of farming, we learn that wheat,
oats, rye, barley, corn, flax and potatoes were the first crops
cultivated. Fruit trees were planted at an early date. Shakers were
taught that agriculture was a part of their religion. A Gardener’s
Manual was published in 1843. In this one writer expressed the Shakers’
belief that “if you would have a lovely garden, you should live a lovely
life”.

Among the inventions was a Screw-Propeller, a rotary or disk harrow,
automatic spring, the sash balance and threshing machine. The Shakers
were among the first to use water power to run their various mills, this
led to the invention of a governor of the overshot water wheel, also a
Turbine water wheel. Many inventions influence our homes today such as
the machinery for making the tongue and groove boards and the first flat
broom invented by Theodore Bates of Watervliet. Broom corn was raised
and brushes manufactured as early as 1798. Table swifts for winding yarn
was a helpful contribution of the Hancock Shakers. Other inventions
included a machine for filling seed bags, and one for filling herb
packages, the apple paring machine, the common clothes pin, the
self-acting cheese press. Did you know the first one-horse wagon used in
this country was a Shaker product of Enfield, Conn.? The Shakers not
believing in patents or monopolies of any type were, however, forced
because of lawsuits from unscrupulous money grabbers, to patent a few
items such as the Revolving oven, which may still be seen in the
Canterbury Bakery, and the far-famed Wash Mill, which won a gold medal
at the Philadelphia exposition in 1876.

The list of inventions and devices of Shaker ingenuity if extended into
detail would seem almost endless. Briefly, I would like to tell you of
some important inventions showing their relation to our lives today.
Brother Thomas Corbett of Canterbury built a static electric machine in
1810. It consisted of a glass cylinder, revolving against a chamois pad
producing frictional electricity. This charge was drawn off into a
Leyden jar. It was the first therapeutic electric machine. It is hard to
imagine a shop today without a circular saw. Sister Sarah Babbitt of
Harvard while watching some of the brothers saw, remarked on the amount
of lost motion, the idea of a circular saw came to her. She experimented
with a notched disk of tin, slipped it on to her spinning wheel, and
finding it adequate to saw a shingle, reported her findings. The first
one piece circular saw may now be seen in the New York State collection
of Shaker Items, Albany, N. Y. The Shakers prowess in research was well
recognized by a gentleman who while visiting his children at Mt.
Lebanon, heard of a Vacuum Pan being used by the Shakers in their
medicinal herb industry. The Vacuum Pan was utilized by the Shakers
because when medicine is boiled in a vacuum it boils at lower degree of
temperature. Hence, many of the good qualities are not driven off in
steam. He asked permission of the Shakers to experiment with the vacuum
pan in an attempt to preserve milk. He made a success and a fortune when
he invented evaporated milk. His name was Gail Borden. If you should
ever go to the Smithsonian Institute in Washington, you will see the
Vacuum Pan. The Shaker Museum at Old Chatham, N. Y. has on display Gail
Borden’s Work Bench.

At its very peak, the Shaker movement numbered only about 6,000 members,
at our beautiful village at Canterbury around 400 members which by some
worldly standards of measurement would be only a drop in a gigantic
ocean of humanity, but we feel that numbers do not count if the
motivating principles are right and if each individual gives all that he
has, and dedicates his “Hands to work, and his Heart to God”, and if he
strives to be his brothers’ keeper. And so, we humbly point to the
cemetery of our early Shaker founders who lived not for fame but who
were dedicated to the beliefs that when a person loves his God and also
his fellow man, the personality of the individual is lost in the Spirit
of Christ. And so even if much of Shakerism remains unknown and the
physical symbols to some seem to disappear completely, we know that
darkness and night may fall, but there is always a tomorrow when the sun
will rise again. For we feel thru the revelation of Mother Ann and the
teachings of Christ, we have followed a path that is clearly defined
leading us to an inner Godliness and a perfect union—a love of God—and a
universal love for all mankind.

Some have asked—why did the Shakers invent so much—why did such beauty
abound in their work—I can only say—The beauty of the world about us is
only according to what we ourselves bring to it. For example: to some,
Autumn is a prelude to winter with its cold and loneliness. To others,
Autumn represents the magnificence of God’s Great Creation, but for we
who follow the path of Godliness, the world takes on a new and more
beautiful dimension, and everywhere we find that inner love that brings
to our lives the great radiance of God’s great love. With you and only
you, lies the choice of selection. To me—I like the words of the poet,
who looking on the beauty of Autumn, said, “Dear Lord, when with this
life I’m thru and I make my abode with you, Just one thing I would ask
of Thee. Will Heaven have Autumn, and crimson trees?”




                              SHAKER MUSIC


The study of music was a basic feature of education among the Shakers.
In the early days, songs were learned orally, and communicated from one
Society to another, by word of mouth.

The first person to urge the study of music was Brother Abram Whitney, a
teacher of music, and a member of the Shaker Society at Shirley, Mass.
Upon solicitation, Brother Abram visited Canterbury and Enfield, N. H.,
and gave lessons in the rudiments of elementary music.

About 1821 he, with the help of other inventive minds, developed a form
of musical notation, called Shaker Script or Letteral System, so named,
because of the use of letters, instead of the conventional round notes.
In this method, the first seven letters of the alphabet, were used.
Capital letters were whole notes, small letters designated quarter
notes, while Italics were used for eighth notes, and half-notes had a
line added to the side of the letter.

In 1843, a Shaker brother from Mt. Lebanon, N. Y., by the name of Isaac
N. Youngs, changed this method, and used only the small letters of the
alphabet, and altered the system of designating the tempo. He published
a pamphlet, entitled “A Short Abridgement of the Rules of Music”. Later,
Russel Haskell of Enfield, Conn. wrote “A Musical Expositor”, or a
treatise on the rules and elements of music, about the year 1847.

In 1852 our beloved Elder Henry Blinn, of Canterbury, had a set of
letteral music type made, from which he printed a book, entitled “Hymns
and Anthems”. When the Manifesto, (a magazine which was published at our
Canterbury Society, and which had a fairly wide circulation throughout
the country) was printed Elder Henry Blinn, the editor, realizing that
many people of the world, as well as Shakers, were reading this
publication, thought it best to use a note-system more universal than
the old Shaker Script system, as each number contained a Shaker Hymn. So
he advised the return of standard notes, commonly used by the world.
Thus in 1871 the round note-system came back into Shaker use. And so,
about that time, the “Repository of Music” was printed, right here at
Shaker Village, containing the elementary and advanced lessons from the
works of able teachers, and showing the more universal note-system used
by the outside world.

Some years later the Shakers of Canterbury hired Professor Davis of
Concord, N. H., to give a course of lessons in music, adding further to
the knowledge that had already been gleaned from Brother Abram Whitney.
Progress was rapid, as brethren and sisters, desiring to add greater
dimensions to their religious expression, diligently labored to learn
all that was offered.

Soon the answer to a continuous desire to learn, came with the
introduction to the Society, of a Dr. Charles Guilmette, of Boston.
Doctor Guilmette was a superior teacher of vocal music, both in theory
and in practice. He proved to be, not only an accomplished vocalist, but
an elocutionist and physician as well. Continuous lessons in correct
breathing and tone-production, awakened in all, an even deeper interest
in singing.

Formation of classes in singing soon followed, composed of groups of
children as well as adults. Soon we had numerous well-executed trios,
quartets, and double-quartets or sextets. Family singing-meetings were
held twice a week, at which each group presented selections for the
enjoyment of the family. Vocal training became a “must” with the
Shakers, and a high standard of quality music was soon attained.

Elder Arthur Bruce of Canterbury, a gifted musician, before entering the
Society, and a brilliant baritone, in his own right, formed and directed
a Shaker Ladies Quartet, called the “Qui Vive Quartet”. Under his
direction, and with the added assistance of visiting musicians, the
quartet acquired a perfection which brought many requests for their
concert performance, from various parts of the country.

The quartet sang entirely without accompaniment, and could sing, at a
moment’s notice, over 100 selections from memory. Nearly all of these
songs were arranged by the members. As an illustration of the
cooperative spirit of the Shakers, the instruction received by this
quartet, was freely shared with the younger singers, resulting in a
family chorus of unusual quality.

First attempts in singing in harmony, by the family, were ventured in
the 1800’s, but only melodies were used in Church Service. These
melodies contained lessons in practical Christian living, and were often
more impressive than the spoken word. One of these was a gentle reminder
in song, of the importance of loving, daily association.

  May I softly walk, and wisely speak,
  Lest I harm the strong, or wound the weak.
  For all these wounds I yet must feel,
  And bathe in love until they heal.

  Why should I carelessly offend,
  Since many joys of life depend
  On gentle words and peaceful ways,
  Which spreads such brightness o’er our days.

Much of the music used in our Church Service, we believe to have been
inspirationally received by members so gifted. Eldress Dorothy Durgin,
who was especially adept in this gift, kept a slate by her bed, upon
which she wrote the spiritual messages which came to her in the night or
early morning hours. She would then pass the words to the one for whom
she thought the message was intended, saying “I thought of you when
these words came to me”.

Some of these messages were accompanied by melody, others were set to
music at a later date. And even today many of these songs remain the
most loved ones in our Canterbury Hymnal. One of these, an especial
favorite, reads as follows:

  Angels call me, call me higher
  To a realm of purer thought;
  Call me to the fountain nigher,
  Where the gems of Truth are wrought.

  Call me here to love and worship,
  Here to serve and learn God’s way.
  Rise, my soul, renewed, responsive,
  Meet the Christ that calls today.

  Ever calling are the angels,
  Calling to the heights Divine;
  Calling where the gifts immortal
  Seek my spirit to refine.

  All of life it is to serve them,
  All of joy to feel their power.
  Rise, my soul, thy friendship deepen
  With the Christ that calls each hour.

These inspirational hymns were not confined to any one individual as in
every Society there were many members so gifted. The Christ Spirit could
easily find expression, where hearts were dedicated to His Service.

Eldress Dorothy Durgin, who was born in Sanbornton, N. H., entered the
Society at the age of 8 yrs., after the death of her mother. A lover of
children, she was given the care of 24 little girls, while still a young
woman. Because of her interest in the youth, she was appointed teacher
of the District School, where she taught for six years. Her qualities of
leadership were tremendous, so it was only natural that she be appointed
to the order of Eldership, at the age of 24 yrs., which position she
held for 50 yrs. She was, probably, without parallel, as a writer of
hymns, and, during her lifetime produced over 30 inspired songs.

Few persons realize the tremendous effort involved in tracing the
authors of our Shaker Hymns. We have always considered that those who
received them, were only the channel through which these inspirational
messages flowed. In other words, we believe that when an individual is
thoroughly consecrated, the personality is lost in the spirit of Christ.

If it wasn’t that we have remembered the circumstances connected with
these hymns, their authorship would have been purposely submerged. For
our Hymn Books bear only the name of the Society, where the hymn was
composed, never its author.

But recently, and only after the author had passed away, did we consent
to give out these biographical facts, for we believe that a talent to
create a work of art, to invent or compose, is God-given. It is a gift,
and we are but the tools chosen to be used in His service. We have, it
is true, the power to increase these talents, by study and by
application; but we are to take no credit for these gifts, for we are
merely His instruments, and they are loaned to us, to be used for the
blessing of others. One of our lovely old hymns ably expresses this
sentiment in the words,

  “Lost in the tide of doing good,
  Thy Master’s humble name.
  So thy discipleship record,
  Beyond all earthly fame.”

Music used in Church Service was without instrumental accompaniment, as
the mixed voices of the members, formed an adequate chorus. However, as
diminished numbers left the singers without the assistance of male
voices, an organ was introduced for vocal support.

Many persons are curious as to the reason for using dancing or marching,
in our earlier religious services. It is amazing how much sound reason
is behind the thinking of the early Shaker leaders, and how much
psychology was employed.

It was the belief of the Shakers that every faculty should be used in
the worship of God, and so, various forms of physical exercise were
introduced, particularly the March. A group of eight or ten singers,
occupied the center of the room, around which the members marched in
perfect formation. It was with a graceful, rhythmic motion of the hands
as the members marched to the slow or quick tempo of the music.

Dancing, or the March, was not such a strange occurrence during a
religious service of the early days of the Church. We have mention, in
the Old Testament, of David and Miriam dancing before the Lord. Also
there are 19 instances where dancing is mentioned in the Mosaic Law.

There was also a definite psychological purpose behind the Shaker
marches, seldom explained, and rarely understood by the general Public.
The perfect rhythmic body motions, of a worshipper, who combined this
activity with a deep mental and religious fervor, developed within
himself, a great spiritual inspiration, almost impossible to understand
or describe, by one who has never witnessed or participated in this form
of worship. But if one could have been present, as I was, and could have
seen the perfect spiritual union, that was produced, when a soul
combined the physical motions, the singing voice and the dedicated
heart, in giving praise and thanks to God—I’m sure you would have agreed
that the physical motions added a still greater dimension to the
expression of Prayer. However, as years passed, and older members were
unable to join in these marches, the exercises were discontinued, as it
was considered necessary to maintain a perfect union among the members,
a service in which all may participate as One.

Today, our Church Service is quiet and more formal, resembling, perhaps
the Prayer meetings held in many of the churches of other denominations.

The first organ was introduced into the Society, by Elder Henry Blinn.
It was one of the first built by the Prescott Organ Co., of Concord, N.
H., and can be seen today, still in working condition, in our little
Museum, right here at the Canterbury Village. When purchased, it was
placed in the School House, where the members gathered for instruction
in the reading of notes.

The introduction of instrumental music was quite an innovation among the
Shakers. Eldress Dorothy Durgin felt that music added refinement to a
young person, so she made a trip to a Music Company in Boston, to
negotiate the purchase of a second organ for instrumental practices.

Eldress Dorothy possessed a gracious, winning personality, and so
impressed the proprietor of the Company, that he presented the Society
at Canterbury with a fine cabinet organ. The first piano was introduced
in 1872. Later, pianos owned and brought in by those who joined the
Society, provided added facilities for instrumental practice.

In order to encourage this musical movement, Eldress Dorothy held
monthly recitals, at which each pupil was represented, everyone, from
the beginner, who could do but simple finger exercises, to the more
advanced student, who could, perhaps, master the difficult music of the
classics. Every child who desired, was given the opportunity for musical
instruction whether so gifted or not.

Soon other instruments found their way into the Society, and an
orchestra was formed composed of 2 violins, cornet, bass-viol and piano.
Some years later another orchestra was organized comprising 2 violins, a
cornet, cello, 2 saxophones, drum and cymbals and pipe-organ and piano.
This orchestra was under the direction of Professor Nevers of Concord,
N. H., who also directed the well-known Nevers Band of Concord. The
Society at Sabbathday Lake, also formed a small, but fine, orchestra.
Indeed every Society made the study of music a part of their educational
life.

On special days such as Easter and Christmas, the members arranged
concerts, at which time they presented selections from Standard
Cantatas, such as Gaul’s Holy City, Handel’s Messiah, Haydn’s Creation,
Mendelssohn’s Elijah, etc., plus many choruses of our original
composition.

On Christmas morning the young people greeted the family, as they
assembled for breakfast, with a beautiful Christmas Carol. One
especially impressive and original arrangement, was called “The
Celestial Choir”. As the family assembled for breakfast a small group of
singers, started singing on the attic stairs, and, as they descended,
others joined them on each loft, resulting in a full chorus of voices,
as they approached the lower hall, after which they joined the family in
a well-prepared Christmas breakfast.

God’s gift of Music has always played a most important part in the life
of the Maine Societies. The library of the family at Sabbathday Lake
reflects the breadth and richness of Shaker musical tradition. Not only
does the collection contain the earliest known Shaker musical manuscript
dated 1802, but it serves as a guide to the musical history not only in
Maine, but of all the other Societies. In some manuscripts, hauntingly
beautiful melodies, in a minor key, written over 175 years ago, before
the gathering of the Societies in Gospel order, mingle with the
impassioned and moving hymns, given under inspiration, by the Holy
Spirit.

In discussing Maine Shaker music we cannot pass over the name of Otis
Sawyer who for nearly fifty years served the Cause of Christ; first as
Elder of the family at Poland Hill, later as Elder of the Church Family
at Sabbathday Lake and finally as Spiritual Head of the Maine Ministry.

Elder Otis is responsible not only for the words and music of countless
lovely hymns, but also the untiring compiler of things musical in Maine.
Due to his efforts we have preserved over 500 inspired hymns from
Alfred, Gorham, Sabbathday Lake and Poland Hill.

One of the most talented musicians ever to have lived the Shaker life in
Maine, was Elder Oliver Holmes. Altho’ he died in 1841 fond memories of
his great gift of song, and of his musical inventiveness still remain.

It is of interest to note that “The Gift to be Simple”, the Shaker song,
perhaps best known to the world, chiefly through Aaron Copland’s having
used it in his “Appalachian Spring”, is from Maine, having been composed
by the Ministry of Alfred.

We must mention, too, the names of two sisters, important for their
contributions to the world of Shaker Music. To Aurelia Gay Mace, the
versatile Chronicler of Maine Shaker history, we owe, not only the
preservation of several remarkable manuscript collections, but also a
wealth of highly personal and original comment both on the songs,
popular among Believers, and the manner in which they were sung. To
Sister Aurelia we are also indebted, for much of our knowledge of the
March in Worship, and the interaction of song and March.

Eldress Mary Ann Gillespie was the composer of many beautiful hymns
during the period immediately following the Civil War. One of the best
loved of her hymns is entitled, “Watching and Praying”. The words
follow:

  Watching and praying, I find you,
  O my beloved, my own.
  Trusting a Father’s rich promise
  I will not leave you alone,
  I will not leave you alone.

  Though thro’ the desert I lead
  Or apart in the mountain ye pray,
  For strength in the hour of need,
  I never will answer you, “Nay”,
  I never will answer you, “Nay”.

The musical education of the Shakers has certainly come a long way,
since the days of Brother Abram Whitney’s letteral notation and the
simple melodies of our early founders. Today, many of our hymns and
anthems are much more elaborate as you will note in a later Shaker
Anthem, entitled “Rejoice”. Although, perhaps, rather empty without the
addition of a full chorus, you will get some idea of the quality of the
composition, as I play it on the organ. The present day Shaker Hymnal
contains many beautiful hymns and anthems. Some were arranged and
harmonized by members, using various Scripture texts, while others were
the musical expression of those simple, sincere soul-breathings from the
dedicated hearts who were imbued with the spirit of the first Christian
founders. One of these hymns ably voices the universal faith of the
Shakers, whose hearts deeply feel for those, their brothers, who suffer
and are in need of love and assistance. The following hymn, entitled
“Universal Prayer”, is one of many, which are sung in our Church
Service, in loving thought of others.

  The Spirit is calling, earnestly calling
      O Zion, unfold in deep prayer.
  O pray for the fathers, the sisters and brothers,
      O pray for the household;
  O pray for the mothers, remember all others,
      O pray for the whole, whole world.

  O Spirit, most holy, earnestly calling,
      So tenderly pleading for all,
  In prayerful devotion we bow at Thy bidding
      To ask Thy rich mercies may fall,
  ’Till household and nation shall see Thy salvation,
      Thy power reach the whole, whole world.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Industries and Inventions of the
Shakers; Shaker Music, by Bertha Lindsay and Lillian Phelps

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INDUSTRIES, INVENTIONS OF THE SHAKERS ***

***** This file should be named 60732-0.txt or 60732-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/7/3/60732/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

